talking to mr charles pierce at the morgan library i'm just going to put this here here don't worry about it it's just there that is perfect that's for you oh that's great thank you well that's wonderful thank you you can kind of uh
I think I mentioned to Gloria that there's a new edition of my book.
It's coming out in March.
It's the first paperback.
And so I have updated it, but I also wrote a little introduction for it.
And I used that introduction as an opportunity to write about Carter and the collection coming here.
I don't know if you read the book, but in the very first chapter, I talk about three collectors, three French, and deciding, you know, different fates for their books.
And in one year, we have Carter, we have Chef Louis Zathmary, and we have Haskell Norman, three people who are in my book, and each of whom did dramatically different things.
So I use that...
You'll be pleased.
I quoted from a release.
I quoted you.
You're quoted.
I remember seeing that part.
Thank you.
I'm delighted that Carter's collection found such a worthwhile home.
This is a statement about the direction of the Morgan estate.
Would you say that you are really entering the 20th century?
Absolutely.
We have, I mean, it must have been about four or five years ago that I actually had a decision, a discussion with the Board of Trustees about the fact that I thought we should make a commitment to collect in the 20th century in the fine fields of the Morgan Library.
So we should do this with regard to pretty books and literary and historical and musical autographed manuscripts, and we should do it with drawings.
And we certainly ought to do it in American literature, as well as in world literature, in English by and large, or in the major Western European languages.
So, at the time we made that decision, we were really making the decision, A, to collect in the 20th century, and B, to collect more aggressively in the American field,
So, American manuscript, American for the book, American drawing.
And I think both make perfect sense because they're both consistent with what Pierpont Morgan and his son Jack Morgan did.
They did collect in the American field, but less aggressively in the American field than in the European field.
What helps you make this decision about the need to enter the 20th century?
Maybe there's a role of this kind of a library.
Well, I think that, as I said, first of all, it just is consistent with the initial collecting interest of the founders.
Pierre Baumoling, for example, did buy manuscripts written by writers who have been deemed great writers of his own time in the 1890s.
He bought with Ned Wilson and the Wife of the Mississippi by Twain, and he bought Oscar Wilde.
There's a famous quote from Mark Twain that you...
That's right.
And permanent exhibition.
An august company, I guess, is the kind of that you use for one of your books.
Clearly an American resonance there.
Absolutely.
And so if...
If Morgan can in the 1890s collect objects from his own time, that certainly seems to me, in the library, as it nears the end of the 20th century, we've only got 11 months to go.
We certainly, on the same highly selective basis, with real attention to rarity and quality and so on, try to collect the best things that we possibly can.
And when Carter's collection came along, I mean, there was American literature from 1870, really right down into this decade, being served up on this enormous sort of time.
And it is, in fact, a research collection, too.
Yeah.
It's very comprehensive, as you know.
It's very thorough.
He cared a lot about conditions.
He was very interested in association copies.
He wanted to...
very traditional, very major, and many, many, many, minor, rather.
Of course, it's Richard manuscripts and other materials, which make it very, as we press on the Pinchon material, make it clear.
You know, it's interesting, I did three interviews with Carter for my book, and I was in the apartment.
I never had, he kept that pretty quiet, that Pinchon material.
Oh, yeah.
I never, that was news to me.
My editor, Holt, about to be former editor who's leaving the company is Ray Roberts, by the way.
In fact, I'm having lunch from him today.
I didn't mention that, by the way.
That just didn't seem relevant to use in that introduction.
I mean, it's relevant as a story, but it didn't seem relevant there.
This is an extraordinary coup for you, the Sir Paul Getty Library.
I'm jumping.
But this is quite a coup for you.
Tell me a little bit about that, how this happened.
Well, I knew he, I had met him through a mutual friend, I guess five or six years ago, and when I met him, he asked me how the Board of Aubrey was doing, and I told him I thought the Board of Aubrey was doing just fine.
He said, we were rather sorry to hear that, because he was rather hoping he might go to buy a few of our objects.
Come on.
No, totally.
And he was really very sweet and funny about it.
So I said, well, that's not the situation, but would you ever consider allowing the library to be a host, a site, or an exhibition of some of your greatest books, especially as they relate to the art of the book?
And so one thing sort of led to another, and this eventually came to pass.
And I'm intrigued that this collection has not yet been shown publicly in England, and I don't know whether it will be now or not.
Certainly, one would think that it would be a natural for the British Library to do it.
You'd think so, but I was really astonished at this announcement.
I tried to get in to see that live already two years ago, and I talked with the Manx.
Even Bryant didn't want to talk to me about it.
But it was pretty clear that they really didn't want that.
I don't think it was anything personal against me.
It was just that they didn't want the public.
I mean, I made it very clear why I wanted to come in.
I wanted to write about it.
And they said, no, this is not the time.
So apparently this is.
So I finally, I don't know what's going on in this new book.
I do.
But we'll see.
This is quite likely.
I'm writing a book about libraries.
uh libraries of the future libraries through history book people booksellers we'll see my eclectic manner but uh um so it's it's open to the public now i guess oh yeah it's a public exhibition but i mean officially it's open yes
And how was your function last night?
It was fine.
It was a more modest reception than simply many that we've had, but I think it has to do with everything from winter to the flu, the fact that these are, this is the week of major auctions of Sotheby's and Christie's, and there are also a lot of major meetings of people that we over here for a few of those functions.
We'll see, but I think we hope there's a review that might be coming out from the time, Friday or Monday or whatever.
Only in New York could you have the Wolfenbeutel at the Grollier Club and this.
I mean, really spectacular.
Absolutely spectacular.
And fresh, really.
And you point out this is a first here.
That's pretty much a first over at the Grollier.
Oh, absolutely.
It's wonderful.
Do you have any thoughts on the role of a library like this as we enter the 21st century?
I've been invited to participate in an ALA symposium next year, the year 2000, and the concept is the museum of the book.
Are all libraries becoming museums, and are all books becoming museum objects?
I don't think.
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Well my thought about the future of an independent research library of this sort is that
And my thinking about independent research libraries a little different than the research libraries that were affiliated with the great universities, such as the Hoseley, the Firestone, whatever, is that we really have, I think, two different functions.
One is a research club, scholarly function, where we are trying to be committed to serving scholars,
we should always be committed to serving scholars.
And the great challenge for all of us at this point is to put all this material online.
Really?
And so we have been
We've developed a plan to do that.
We've raised an enormous amount of money to do it.
It is being done as we speak.
Oh, no, you say all.
You mean all.
Every single object in the Morgan Library will have a short bibliographical description of this is... A bibliographical description?
I thought you were talking about scanning the content.
No, no, no, no.
Just a short bibliographical description.
description of every object.
That makes sense.
Well, absolutely.
But this is something that we've not done before.
If you ask my colleagues, have you catalogued the collection, they will of course say no.
But their way of cataloguing the book
and the Folger's way of cataloging the same book and the Houghton's way of cataloging that same book may be three entirely different things.
Now there is general agreement about what a short bibliographical description of a book that printed in this 15th, 16th, 17th century and so on is going to be, and it's now possible to convert this material into this uniform
And it's going to be a fantastic contribution to scholars all over the world.
And when they'll be able to get this.
When do you anticipate this will go online?
Well, I was told the other day by a colleague of mine and my ass about this by the end of the year 2000, so it's only another year and a half.
Do you have a website for this now?
Do you already have a... We actually have a website for the bookshop, and Laura and a number of others are in the process of
I'm creating a website for the library now, and I'm very committed to doing that.
I want it done sooner rather than later.
You may be able to, you know more about where you are, Laura, than I do.
Yeah, we really need to have it up and moving in the spring.
Well, I think it's at the latest when our next exhibition opens.
But a group of us from different departments have formed a committee and, you know, can represent curatorial and information systems in itself.
And we've been making things, we've done some mock pages in itself.
And because we are, you know, again, a dual nature, trying to satisfy the dual nature of institutions.
But anyway, it's a work in process.
What's your position on, or what are your thoughts on?
Scanning some apart, or all of the collections?
As Mother Boyle had tripped down a little bit, and as LC is doing it.
to a great extent.
I'm very interested in doing that, but I felt that the first responsibility to just get this to produce a short bibliographical description of every single object that is here, then two other things can happen thereafter.
The curatorial staff can then provide more scholarly descriptions of the same object as time and energy and money permits.
And the other thing that could be done is that those parts of the collection that are worth scanning, I can ask the curators of those collections which parts, which books, which manuscripts you really think are, does it make sense to do this.
what's your view about the current state of the technology of scanning, and come up with some sort of estimate as to what it's going to cost.
Most people that I've talked to so far feel that there has been great progress made in the scanning and the digitalizing and so on of many of these manuscripts and books, but that the process is still evolving.
It's still very much coming.
So we really haven't
lost anything by not doing this.
And I'd be perfectly willing to let the big boys, the library found, Rose, the National Gallery, Washington, and London, and so on, figure this all out until the rest of us would swim along in their way.
And it's not just a question of access.
I mean, I was up at Cornell, and they're scanning books.
But the process requires guillotining a book.
I mean, you actually have to destroy an object in order to
to make a digital copy of it.
So clearly, what we're talking about in this instance, they also have machines now that they're developing.
They have cradles, and they take into account.
But that's why the Hinman collator is never perfect.
You always see those little wavy, they were shooting these first folios that you really couldn't bend.
So I would have to think that's what you're saying here, is just to
maintaining the integrity of them.
Absolutely.
We have this country's greatest collection of medieval renaissance manuscripts.
A very, very key percentage of it is in Sicily.
Most of them are therefore encoded and are bound.
And one of the great contributions that the Pope Father made to the study of that subject earlier on were in fact to take
photographs of every single miniature and every single one of those manuscripts.
Those photographs are bound and available in black blinders and in the reading room.
But they are all fading.
This is now photographs were taken of how much of the collection?
Well, this was every single illuminated manuscript.
Every illuminated manuscript.
twelve or thirteen hundred of those, but each one of those manuscripts had many, many miniatures, and they were very painstakingly photographed over time.
The photographs were then put in binders, and the binders are in the reading room.
That's all fine, but it now looks like the most incredibly antiquated and obsolete form of
replicating these objects, whereas obviously with digitalizing the scanning process now, we would be able to detect enough of these, produce much higher quality.
And I think the real question is going to be, how long will these things last?
How long will the digital tape last?
And there's some indication that they last from four to six years, and then they tend to... That's exactly right.
I'm writing about this.
Okay, and you know a great deal more than I do about this.
That's just one of the reasons I'm just
You talk about Gilgamesh is from stone tablets, which lasts forever.
But they have Viking material from the space probes.
It's already useless.
Millions and millions of dollars of data that came back from space.
You can't access it now.
You have machines that can read it.
It's on magnetic tape that's unusable.
And the technology is wonderful.
But the longevity is major.
And as you say, four to six years, if it's at zeros and ones, that's fine.
But somebody has to be able to switch to the phrase, the word they use is migration, to migrate the data from one format to another.
That's right.
Now, these photographs, were they shot as a
What was the purpose of that?
I mean, to have a documentary record of what you have outside of the... It was probably to have a documentary record.
It was partly to try to persuade a number of scholars.
It was partly for a combination.
To preserve, in other words, to see if it were possible to persuade a number of scholars who were really studying the iconography
of many of these images, to look at a photograph of it, rather than to have to bring the manuscript down and open up it.
And what did you find?
Oh, it was a tremendous resource.
scholars of these manuscripts were enormously grateful.
They were.
So they were willing to read the copy as opposed to the... Well, it obviously depended very much on the kind of work that they were doing.
But for those, for example, who were primarily interested in studying the miniature as if it were a work of art and studied the iconography, and they didn't particularly have to see the
They didn't have to see the binding, and they weren't particularly interested in the text and all the rest of it.
This served reasonably well.
On the other hand, when they made it clear that they really did need to see the thing itself, and we would provide the thing itself under the reason.
This is one of the questions that I'm asking repeatedly.
to scholars.
Are you satisfied with a thanks simile?
Or do you really feel that you have to have the original?
And nine times out of ten, they really want the original.
Absolutely, they want the original.
And it's for reasons beyond just looking at it.
I mean, there's something almost spiritual.
Yeah, absolutely.
They want to see the thing itself.
Exactly.
So tell me a little bit about your plans for
The 75th year?
This is quite an exciting year for the Morgan, isn't it?
Well, it is.
It's the 75th year of the library as a public institution, and for many people.
It still seems as if it is a private institution that one of them that I've been trying to do with Gloria's help and others in the last ten or twelve years is to dramatize me that we exist.
Because there were a great many people who were born and raised in New York and never been in the lobby library.
Ask me a cop on the street where it is.
Precisely.
And the library should assume as much responsibility for that as anything else because there was a real emphasis earlier on keeping a very, very low profile.
My view here is that we are a public institution here to serve the museum going public and we are to serve scholars.
And therefore we've got to set ourselves up as best we can to do those two things.
And we've also got to advertise
the fact that we are here and that we are a public institution and the creation of this cafe out here and the building in this atrium was actually a great help because a lot of people I think that a lot of people could have a cup of tea or coffee or have a meal here then it is a public institution and it's brought a lot of people in I think some of them only come to have a meal but some of them then
fill out.
It makes a statement, doesn't it?
You're really inviting people in.
Yeah.
And that's a very concrete way to do it.
And I think that that really has helped in certainly the efforts to
to get reviews, to advertise our presence on WQXR, or when we have modest sums of money for in-print advertising and so on, to produce.
We have a much more complicated, aggressive exhibition schedule.
It just gets, I think most people would say that within the last ten years,
the profile of the library as a public institution has, in fact, raised, been raised.
I mean, it may have gone from, you know, here to here.
I think there's a whole quadruple equal.
As a practical matter, when you, being a public institution at this level, what exactly, you certainly don't want to invite the public to come in and to be readers.
No, on the scholarly side, no.
I mean, what we want there is, in fact, anybody and everybody who has a solid, substantial scholarly reason for being here.
But in terms of the library as a museum, I would like more people to know where we are, to know where the collections are, and to have a reason to come here to see both the special exhibitions, but also objects from our own collections.
Do people turn out to see book exhibitions, just out of curiosity?
It's a question I've never asked.
much less the drawings and paintings.
And, in fact, as we just jump in, I think that this exhibition, we were curious to see how much more of the awards we might get, but in comparison to some other kinds of marketing that we were able to do, and, you know, just also the reputation of the quality of this collection.
And the name, of course.
Yeah, and then it hasn't been seen, so we would expect to draw more than
I'd love to get the figures on this.
I really am interested in people who are interested in books.
I never thought that you could measure it in terms of
people who come to an exhibition, but why not?
I don't honestly know.
I have all the curiosity that Gloria has to see.
Obviously, the Getty name is going to be an attraction, but I'll be interested to see how much of an attraction it is, because I think particularly without all the fanfare surrounding the Getty Museum of a couple of years ago, I'm not so sure how
conscious Americans are, average Americans are, of the Gettys, other than a lot of gasoline and oil.
Whereas in England, Paul Getty is a major force, because he's been a major philanthropist, and he's, as you say, made the works of art.
Just do Alexis, as I did, a Lexus search of him.
When I was up at Hereford Cathedral last year, I don't know if you've been up there, the chain book, that building there, he built that.
showed my wife when I arrived.
He's ours now.
He's ours.
And he didn't come for the dedication for that, so I would have been surprised had he come for this.
Well, I don't want to take up too much of Mr. Pierce's time.
I certainly thank you for it.
I'm sorry.
No, I'm glad you've seen you.
I wish you well, and thank you.
These quotes will be very useful.
This will be the April piece, by the way.
Oh, good.
It's the next one I'm writing.
What will you be showing in April?
Oh, that's great.
That's terrific.
That's great from our point of view.
Actually, it comes out at the end of March.
I'll be writing this for the next two weeks.
But then you can give me a good list of what's forthcoming through the end of the year, or I'll be happy to get that in as well.
Yeah, we have a Washington exhibition right now in Huntington.
That's in September.
In the spring we have a drawing, the Major Browning Show, and then the George Washington Show, which opened at the Huntington Inn.
Oh, that's in Huntington.
Yeah.
all right so we're going to go take a look at you have a card that i could use because i'll be quoting it oh yes well i felt wonderful excellent i've been in your facility a number of times and john i've interviewed john a couple of times and ed and this is quite a uh
Quite an exciting development for the Borgen Library.
They're very thrilled to have this.
This is a first, isn't it, for Sir Paul to agree?
It's the first major exhibition.
Individual items have been lent to in various places around the world, but not anything more than that so far.
What was his thinking on this, to allow this to come here, do you think?
It is quite a... It's quite a wrench, because when one does these things, you don't really think...
the fact that um the exhibition runs from january to speaking in may it doesn't sound too bad but actually when you lose your stuff in november and you don't get it back to the middle of the summer it gets a bit worse doesn't it so if you're in a rush why don't you just give me a little bit of a overview of did you have any specific questions you want to get over well i i've read the catalog so i'm just
Maybe you could give me a sense of how representative this is of the entire collection.
Well, it's not like a cross-section of the library, because it's largely that, but it's leavened with sort of personal favourites, which sort of give us a tilt away from the whole effect, I think.
But essentially we try to include a little bit of everything, which is really... It's bindings, it's illumination, calligraphy, typography.
and the colourful books, really.
So he tries to suggest the whole art of the book theme from the Middle Ages right through to the modern.
And that is essentially the theme of the larger collection?
Yes, it's come to become that.
It never was that recently, I don't think.
I didn't know that it was anything other than books being bought.
And eventually it becomes more than it was, doesn't it, the collection?
Sure, of course.
And you suddenly find yourself with a...
Why don't you tell me what this is?
This is an after-text model for the library.
It's not exactly anything.
This was done at the sort of planning stage, but it essentially shows you the interiors as they are.
And do you have readers come here?
Scholars can visit to see specific items, and book collecting groups can visit.
bookbinders societies and things that come on little tours and so on, and we put up an exhibition very much like this in the back.
This largely reproduces what you would see in the library.
Really?
So there is an exhibition?
An exhibition will be put out by Brian Maggs for the occasion, which can be slanted towards whoever's coming.
But Brian is the librarian.
I'm fascinated by that because I'll be writing about scholar booksellers.
It's a new book that I'm working on.
That's a chapter.
I love the fact that you would go to a bookseller to be a librarian.
A collector of this magnitude would
Well, I mean, that again is something that develops over the years, and that's eventually, I mean, you know, one knows the books backwards, so who better to do it, really, I suppose.
Who knows the books, but also, I think, knows what the individual wants, that you have a...
Well, we've all grown up with the collection as it's developed.
Is that right?
So you've been there more or less from the beginning?
Well, I've known it from the beginning.
I've known it for 20 years, which is as long as I've been doing it.
When, essentially, would you say the collection began, as we know it?
In the early 70s.
It was just too late for the Abbey sales, which is, I think, one of his regrets, because many of them, plus John Rowland Abbey, who was a great finding collector.
many of the books in the library came with this collection.
A-B-E-Y?
A-W-E-Y.
E-Y.
Yeah, there was a whole series of sales in the late 60s, which Paul just missed, I think, but picked up many of the items later in the trade.
And that's what really started him off on the sort of fine books, I think, was the dispersal of that collection.
One of the great opportunities.
Would you say that this, I mean, how many collections like this
will a person be able to form?
I mean, this undoubtedly is certainly one of the great collections of the late 20th century.
Yes, it certainly is, and a great amount of work has gone into it from all sides, really, including the collector's thought.
I don't know, one of the encouraging things is when you look at the acquisition dates of the books, how many of them are very recent?
purchases the last 10 years or so.
So I think there's hope for future collectors and I think this proves it really.
Well the material of this caliber can still be had.
Just look at the Caxton out there.
Yes, you wouldn't believe it.
You see, you could wait a lifetime and never get a chance to buy that, but luck and various other circumstances bring it forward.
So you have to grasp the opportunity when it's presented.
Anything at the top of his wish list that you care to share?
There are various holes that one might like.
I mean, the Romanesque binding, for example, would be something we would need one day.
One could never hope for a treasure binding like the Morgan has here.
In fact, Mr. Pierce was jokingly telling me about the... I asked, how did you...
managed to secure such a triumph.
And he said, well, he was talking with Sir Paul, and he said, I was hoping, this was a joke, that maybe they were in desperate straits and they were willing to sell a few things from the collection.
He said, no, I don't think so.
Did you want to show me around a few things and just kind of talk a little bit?
I know you certainly, I mean, I'll be certainly free to look at the entire collection of my own, but maybe you could just point out a few
uh items that that appeal particularly to you how many items do we have here i think 102 or something some such i mean i can't i mean i have my personal biases but that's sort of not really relevant to suppose ideas we all have our favorites i think it's one of the most extraordinary things which have been together as a group what do we call them again wooden bindings
How many items are there in the Wooten?
Obviously there are many other bindings for him around the world, but this is a very substantial tax group of them.
What is it that attracts a person to bindings?
When we think about books, when you think about the text, but are the texts relevant to the bindings in your view?
Well, they can be.
I mean, that certainly is the case.
I mean, obviously many books and bindings tend to be Bibles and prayer books.
but to get something like a utopia at a time by it is a real treasure.
And that is a contemporary binding, right?
Yeah, it's pretty much as the use of stars.
Wow.
It should, shouldn't it?
Maybe you should use your influence.
This is a binding from Yorkshire in the 12th century.
Look at the condition of that.
And the thing that amazes me is that you can actually have something as well.
as good as this, if you look at the back cover.
It's still got this deerskin dust wrapper on it.
This thing put over the covers with its hair still there.
It's incredible when you can visit Byland Abbey in Yorkshire, you can stand in this ruin to be able to sort of have something because it's like this original condition, like the day it was done virtually.
How do you explain that?
How is it that a book that one would think would be more fragile certainly than The Stones?
How is it that books managed to survive?
Books seem to be very indestructible in many ways.
It's extraordinary.
I mean, that hasn't been sitting on a shelf anywhere or anything.
It's been kept.
And it's been out there, and it was just recently acquired in 1997.
It's been in America for the last hundred years, in fact.
Where was it prior to...?
The last public appearance was in the hoe sale in about 1910.
Oh, so that was a hoe copy?
Yeah.
Fantastic.
Amazing.
I had no idea that the...
It's just really marvellous.
So what do you feel when you handle a book like that?
It's just a huge privilege.
I can't believe it.
It's the sort of thing you expect to find in the Morgan Library, for example.
Or the Bodleian or something out there.
I'm not going to find the collection.
It's just such an excitement.
What else is good?
One of only three copies.
This is the first book illustrated with copper engravings.
Boccaccio, catalogue 15.
This is a print by Collard Manchin who was the... I mean this is a nice thing, but it fits together.
He learnt printing together with Caxon and Bruges before Caxon came to London.
So it fits very well with the Chaucer.
But it's just another coincidence when things start to fit together in a collection like this after it's been going for a long time.
Look at the condition.
The paper is so crisp.
And the data on this is, I'm looking for 1476.
This manuscript is so good.
This is the breviary of Bernard Haino, which is number 13 in the catalog.
This is so fantastic.
When H.P.
Krauss showed it to the previous Morgan librarian, Belle de Costa Greene, she told him it was forgery.
Come on.
It's written up in Krauss's memoirs.
It's one of the few stories.
So she passed on this?
Yeah.
She had an opportunity to buy this.
Young man, you have a
An example of the work of a Spanish forger, she said, which rather shook him because it was one of his first purchases in New York.
So Bill Glean passed on this.
Yeah.
So here it is, you see, it's rather a nice touch.
It's probably the first time it's been here since.
That's a great story.
How could you possibly think something like that as a forgery?
It's still perfect, right?
It's wonderful.
This is a 1462 Minds Bible.
It's number 12.
Wonderful.
It's number 2.
Sold off by the Toronto Brown Library, yes.
Now this is an interest, this is a rather... Well, this whole section here actually is rather interesting because this represents the supposants from American institutional libraries.
Come on now.
Five items.
No, no, three here.
You've got the Doheny Library.
That's item number four.
Four.
Okay.
Number one here is the Folger Shakespeare Library.
Folger discarded that?
Yeah.
Very northly, they discarded them.
This was a bookbinding that they discovered on their shelves on a 16th century English book.
And they took it off and sold them leaf.
1989.
And what's the estimated date on that?
It's 7th century.
It's possibly one of the earliest English manuscripts.
And the folder?
Disposed of it.
This was disposed of by the John Carter Brown Library.
Of course they had reasons for doing it.
Of course they did.
What could they be?
Well, the Carter Brown Library wanted to focus on Americana, which is their main thing.
Of course, this is not Americana.
It's a German luxury manuscript.
So, therefore... So, how did they acquire it?
Why did they acquire it in the first place?
It was a gift.
It was a gift?
Where it is?
Camarillo, isn't it?
Yes.
They were given the entire collection, and then they decided that that was not their thing, so they sold off the collections to raise money.
But what amazes me is that these are items one, two, and four in the catalogue.
We are making a statement here, aren't we?
Well, it is amazing in one way or another, because most of the great items are in private collections or in public domain, so the only way something is going to be released
is if something like this happens.
And Morgan, of course, had the same problem, too.
By the time he started collecting, though it was
around 1900, most of the major manuscripts, like the Book of Kells, the Lindisfying Gospels, all these things, they were already in the public domain.
So the only way that you're going to get major pieces is if some institution changes its focus and then decides to sell.
But they weren't discarding it because they thought it was worthless.
Well, quite contrary, I mean.
Indeed, they got rid of it for the other reasons, because the things have become
so valuable that they felt that these assets could be what were their own interests.
The suggestion that once an item goes into an institutional library that it's gone forever is not really true, is it?
We've even had a Morgan duplicate sale, haven't we?
Yeah, with the printed books and the Sotheby's sale.
When was that?
There have been several different sales.
This was a couple dozen years ago.
In the 70s there was no.
Printed books.
They were duplicate printed books.
And that is great for collectors.
It is.
Certainly the provenance is wonderful.
You have to say that if a book is good enough for these places, the news certainly is good enough for oneself, isn't it?
That's a great quote.
How did you choose which items that you would include?
Or did Sir Paul make the decision, make the selection?
It was his selection, which I think was perhaps refined by a process of give and take, partly quality questions, but also really space.
It was quite a difficult process.
Space here, you mean?
Oh, yes.
Well, I mean, you see the room is packed, and there are only about 100 items, and there are many more that could have been included, but worth it.
How do you judge this exhibition?
as comparing it to others that you've had here at the Morgan.
I'm not meaning to disparage any of the other ones, but this is quite a triumph for the Morgan to be getting the first public viewing of examples from this library.
Oh, yes?
Well, it's very rare that we have exhibitions like this.
If you'd identify yourself with the tapes... Oh, sorry, Roger Wick.
It's very unusual that we have an exhibition of books and manuscripts that belong completely to somebody else.
That is, first of all, very unusual.
So it was quite a coup that we were able to secure this show, because normally, of course, our exhibitions might include loans from other institutions or other people, but usually they're in the context of more of the material, supporting what is already here.
So this is actually extremely unusual.
Has it happened before?
Can you think of any other individual collections that have been... We had the exhibition from the Bernard Breslauer collection of single leaves here.
That was also, like this, an extremely unusual example, but it was a very fine collection that we wanted to show.
And there were also institutional collections.
Oh, this is William Boakley.
We've had photos from Eton College.
We've had certainly a number of exhibitions relating to institutions, and I think there have been private collections of drawings that have been shown.
But one thing we might say, and Lou Ashby, one thing we might say is that when we decide on an exhibition, we are very interested in showing things which are related to the Morgan collections themselves.
And one of the wonders of the Getty collection, in its beauty and its selectivity, is that in many ways it mirrors the kind of collecting that Pierpont Morgan was doing himself.
And that in showing these things, we're showing the kinds of things which have helped to
serve as the basis for this institution's collective.
And we do these things as a public service, because obviously not the thousands of people that will come to the show.
Those people, A, probably can't all go over across the ocean on an airplane and then tromp through the Wormsley Library.
So I tried.
They wouldn't let me.
I couldn't get in.
Even one person.
So this is a way of sharing this collection.
So we're performing our kind of public service by housing this collection.
I would say so.
Temporarily so it can be shared with the public.
That's one aspect of it that's supposed to be enough.
Would you think, if we're talking about a private collective, would you look at this library that's put together in, what did you say, about 20 years?
30 years.
At this point in the 20th century, do you stand in awe of that?
Maybe I'm asking for too much of a characterization, but it is quite an achievement, I think, for an individual to put together a library.
Yes, and I think also, considering the range, I think that's what
is appealing in what may distinguish from other such exhibitions that we have had, that here we really have the whole range, as Andrew said, that reflects our own collecting interest that starts with the manuscript tradition and goes right up to the 20th century, not only including books for their content, but also the bindings.
It's really put together a collection of book bindings, so it really is an overview of the history of the book.
And every object is beautiful.
I mean, every piece that you see in the exhibition is stellar and stellar and beautiful in addition.
So it's not only a wonderful range, but every example is beautifully preserved.
So these are books which are ostensibly meant to be read, but this is a museum exhibition, and this certainly would qualify as a kind of museum exhibition, right?
Of beautiful objects.
Oh, yeah.
Everything here is of that.
Mm-hmm.
We're interested not only in the intellectual content of the items, but their physical characteristics as well.
It's the Booker's Objects.
I think it's probably the unifying theme of the collection as it's evolved.
It's the whole thing.
How large would you say his library, Sir Paul's library is now?
How many items?
Approximately?
Seven or eight thousand.
Which is not many.
in terms of Ho, who perhaps had 100,000.
Certainly Heber had 100,000.
Heber had 100,000.
I don't think Ho's was that large, but he had a jump start on everybody else.
He had two Gutenberg rivals, didn't he?
One on Vellum and one on... Yes.
Yes, we haven't got to that yet, I'm afraid.
Well, how many are there that are in private hands?
I mean, the Scheide copy, which is at Princeton, and that's about it, I think.
Maybe there's one in Germany, I guess.
I think the German ones are in the public collections, also.
I mean, if you count both and utilize the public collections.
You do.
I think you actually would.
Right.
I think there are institutions, but that's not in front of us.
There might be one.
I don't know.
Does anyone have anything they feel I should know for this article that I'm writing?
Any observations that might be particularly useful?
I'm doing an article for the Morgan Library on its 75th, and also, as it happened, I'll be discussing this
exhibition and the Wolfenbeutel at the Globe, that you would have these two exhibitions going on in one city.
Which is nice.
It's pretty nice.
Yes, it is.
And at firsts, too.
I mean, I don't think that that... Well, it's too fast, isn't it?
Yeah, it really is.
It's kind of nice.
I think people will be surprised at what somebody like Mr. Genndy, in his case, has been able to acquire in a relatively short period, that works of this quality are even still available.
If you concentrate on what you're doing, you can still achieve it.
And you have to, how do I phrase this, but it certainly requires more than means, doesn't it?
Oh, certainly.
You have to have the means to do it.
More than the means.
Well, let's start with the means.
But, you know, all right, so let's assume that, fine, we understand that he has the means, but what does it require beyond that?
Well, dedication, patience, and inspiration, I think, probably.
And you combine those together over a long period of time.
And you're probably too modest to say this, but good advice, too.
Well, probably.
Well, the knowledge or the wherewithal to know to where to go, to get that advice, to get it.
I mean, anybody can go out and splurge all their money in Sotheby's and Christie's next week, but you're not going to achieve a collection that is going to sort of have a long-term sense in the way that this has.
I mean, who has greater means than, I'm not asking for a comment, but, say, Bill Gates?
You know, and they say he's creating these digital reproductions of great paintings.
I asked Umberto Eco about that, and he said, isn't it interesting that the man who's doing that is the same man that spent 30 million, you know, outbid the Italian nation for the Leicester Codex.
Isn't that encouraging for books, that actually somebody who will have digital photographs still wants, and is also the master of
The computer thing actually wants to buy real books.
And apparently he has been buying.
I think that's a great encouragement.
It's interesting, and it's certainly interesting, if anything.
Well, I'd like to just kind of look around, and is there anything else that you think that would be particularly pertinent for me to walk away with?
Well, I think that
It made the evidence that he has a special predilection of things, English, and the reasons for that are clear.
And this, too, aligns him really with Morgan, who was an anglophile and one of our greatest strengths in illuminated manuscripts and autographed manuscripts and printed books as English, you know, art.
That is important.
Yes.
It's interesting things Italian was perhaps equally important, wasn't it?
We're talking about Morgan now.
Well, yes, but that was the building.
But I think he was especially interested in English manuscript illumination.
And I think that they were more favored.
His Caxton's are another example.
The Caxton's and certainly the Dickens Holdings, the Sir Walter Scott.
I mean, that was...
And, of course, he lived in England, so he had this real affinity.
There were, what, 63 Caxtons here?
Is that about right?
I haven't counted recently.
We acquired another one about him.
Oh, you did?
Yes.
I just simply didn't want it to seem that Morgan's emphasis was
only English because his European holdings are exceedingly strong, his Italian holdings are as well, but he shared that interest in English materials.
I mean the French bindings, French bindings for example, certainly the best collection in England.
I don't know about America, but certainly outside France and Europe is the best collection of them.
Well, so there is a wider view
here as well.
One wouldn't like to say he was purely English, but there may be a slight favourite as well.
No, I wouldn't say it was pure, but I think there is a special predilection, and Morgan also had that special predilection, but of course both of them collected over the large geographical land.
How many Caxton's does Sir Paul have?
Very well, but it's a good one.
That's not bad.
We've put it in a prominent position.
I was enjoying it when I came in.
It's quite exciting to
We were discussing that wouldn't it be interesting if there was a mirror behind that Sir Thomas More back there so we could see the binding.
Not this time around, unfortunately.
But we're delighted that the front of space is so elegant.
Anyone have any favorites?
Pick two favorites.
Oh, well, of course, I'm quite prejudiced.
But one of my favorites clearly is the Otto Boyerian manuscript because it's
And that's number two.
One example of a true luxury manuscript, and actually some of the other pages are even more impressive.
You can see them in a candlelight, where even the text pages are written in gold and purple vellum background.
So this is really a magnificent piece in gold and silver.
So it's a wonderful example of a monastic luxury manuscript.
And of course, I'm especially attracted to it because I feel that it was
seen by the artists who did a comparable luxury manuscript that we have in our own collections so i have other reasons attached to it because it links up you know with something our own interesting characterization of luxury monastic it's almost an oxymoron in a way yes but these things were regarded as you know part of the assets of the monastery and were kept in the treasury they were not kept on the monastic
I just came back from Mount Athos in Greece and I did a piece for Smithsonian and it's exactly the real treasures are in the sacristy and the treasury and they have to vote the board has to vote that you can go in and see these things it was quite unusual to have that wonderful exhibition really yeah it was so you okay well thanks so much for the time and I'm glad we're able to you can give me a ring back in London I will thank you very much appreciate it
Appreciate it.
Thanks.
Of course, to go completely modern, the romance connected with one of the very late manuscripts is the Keats, which has one of the most incredible book findings ever made.
I thought that was a Kelmscott Chaucer as I was walking by.
Yeah, this is the Sankorskine Sakhla Prusa.
Absolutely amazing.
And I will never forget this.
This is 91.
Yeah, and this is all beautifully illustrated.
And I will never forget this, because I had to go through and be sure that the description which gave the total number of joules was correct.
Come on!
Yes, there are 1,027 joules, and being
And you counted them?
And I counted them to make sure that that description was... Did you get the talent sheet?
I did.
I sent so many of them.
Did you itemize the various jewels?
I did.
And... Is this broken down?
Yeah, it's in the catalog.
However, I decided that I would take the word of the creator when it came to the number of different pieces of leather that were used, which were 4,500.
I made no attempt to verify that.
Extraordinary.
Counting the jewels was enough.
But anyway, it is an extraordinary piece.
And it was...
the second best of its type for a while.
But then the great tragedy that is in everyone's mind, namely the sinking of the Titanic, ended up destroying the most fabulous of this type of life.
It went down in the Titanic, the famous Omar.
I knew that one had gone down.
I didn't realize it was regarded as... This was the penultimate.
This is all in the catalog.
So it has all these romantic stories attached to it.
So I think this has become one of my favorites.
So it may not be everybody's favorite.
Well, you wonder if that would have survived at that depth after all these years.
I don't think the leathers went down there.
I'm just wondering.
Yes, there were other stories connected with that, too, that they tried to make a replica of it, and that ended up in Berlin during the war, where it was kept in a container that was so hot that when they tried to recover it, they found only the gems.
So that was that one.
And so then they did a third Omar.
And where is that one now?
That one apparently is on display in the British Library.
They did it after the designs, because all the drawings, which are very intricate, have survived.
They're all preserved.
So anyway, I'm not particularly fond of this because of all these stories.
And it is a gorgeous piece of bookbinding.
Now, did you all go to England and work in the selection?
selecting things or was this basically sir paul getty well of course george pleasure i know george right well it's his show of course he spent a lot of time there and then bill and i also were able to go there and work uh at the warmsley library doing our research that's exciting this was very very nice to work actually in the place itself well and of course counting these jewels from a photograph would have been very trying indeed
Well, did you ever lose your count and have to spat over again?
How do you keep your count in something like that?
Well, you do little diagrams, you see, because on the back, you see the little grave clusters, you see the little grave clusters, and each of those has one, about 15 or 20 jewels, and then you just do it, you do it piece by piece.
Have you ever done that before?
On a book?
Yes, I counted the jewels in some of our jewel bindings, but never, never with an inventory of a thousand.
Why is it necessary to double, to check up on the, on the, you know,
the person who made the book?
Well, because when you do an entry, you all want to make sure that, you know, that how the thing has been described is correct.
And I think others might have simply accepted the count, but I thought, well, I'm going to check it just this week.
That's great.
How many times did you do it?
I don't think that question is unknown.
Disregarding the counting.
Well, I tell you, it was much easier having someone else's count.
If I had to have counted anew,
But you know, when they say, well, there are so many garnets that make up the great postures, then that way it already gives you a mode of breaking it down.
Don't go crazy.
My first count, I'd be one off, two off.
Have to do it again.
Next one, I'd be three over.
I had to recount some of them a few times.
Well, this isn't just right, but anyway.
So these are your two favorites.
How about yourself?
Yes, I'll tell you my favorites.
Thank you.
I mentioned that we went to Wormsley.
Of course, it's important.
All serious art historians would never consider writing about an object they haven't seen.
Of course, I would think so.
It's important.
And one of my favorite objects is this little soldier that was made for Anne Boleyn, because of the romantic story connected with Anne.
And also, I had read the literature on this book before, and when I was examining the book and doing my discussion of it,
I found that this coat of arms was in a particular place that no one had commented on it.
And I thought, well, why is it there in Psalm 110?
Why?
Because there's only two coats of arms in the book, one at the frontispiece, you expect, and then this one.
And I thought, well, why there, full-page coat of arms?
So I did something which no one else had done before, which is actually just read the psalm.
See if that was significant.
You actually went to the text.
Yes, I read the book.
That's good.
I like that.
That will find its way in here.
That's very, very interesting.
And discovered that this psalm has extremely interesting motives that might relate to the history of where Anne Boleyn was at this particular place in her journey towards queenship.
And this, for instance, is the psalm that mentions that thou shalt be a king forever according to the order of Melchizedek.
It has that phrase in it.
And also the business about let your enemies be your footstool.
And I thought certain key phrases like this might have been encouragement for Anne, as she was then in the process of trying to push Henry to the edge of cutting himself off from Rome.
Because at this stage, when she acquired this book, Henry had not cut himself off yet.
And she was extremely frustrated.
She was a Protestant.
She wanted her husband.
She wanted the divorce to go through.
And Henry was still resisting that.
And so she commissioned this book.
specifically must have asked for this coat of arms to be right here and it's the coat of arms that incorporates henry's name the you know the h-e-r you know now is this in the is this in the catalog yes this is in the catalog so you don't have to remember but but but but is that illustration that is also oh one street yes um and also i have a full set of illustrations with the exception of this one because so many people are they like this one
and so I can get those to you later.
And that's what I mentioned, looking at the actual objects.
I'd seen the photographs of this, I had the literature in my hand before going to England, and I just thought, oh, well, interesting book, coat of arms, so what?
But it was only when I was sitting there going through it, and I thought,
you know, why is this here?
There must have been a reason.
And then reading the text, to me, revealed indeed that she could have had this then, used it to pray for him.
And if Henry had dropped by, she could have opened it up right at this stage and said, oh, Henry, have you paid attention to this particular psalm recently?
See, what you've done, this is almost, this is the ultimate association book.
That's a phrase that we use in the association books.
But what you've done is, and there's a lot of intuition that has to be done here.
I mean, you do have to
think about the evidence in front of you.
But now you were looking at these primarily, initially, as art objects, is that right?
Oh yes, sure, sure, yes.
But, you know, I'm very interested in text-picture relationships.
When something is odd about a book, then you start asking, well, why did it happen?
Why did it occur?
Why did the person who commissioned this want this coat of arms at this particular stage?
Tell me a little bit about your interest in text-picture relationships.
That's something that interests me.
And that doesn't even have to be necessarily with objects in this collection.
This is another one of my favorites that relates to text-picture relations.
This is a book of ours, French.
And it might not have been included in the exhibition were it not for the fact that it has an extremely unusual series of calendar illustrations.
Now, it was the tradition for Books of Hours to have a picture, usually of the zodiacal sign, or what's called the labor of the month, trimming grapevines, reaping, sowing.
And this was a tradition that went back hundreds of years.
But here we have a manuscript that was made for Mr. Gouffier, the Gouffier Hours, and he's in the catalogue, I forget which exact.
Adrian Gouffier.
Well, it's kind of like an item 19, yes.
Who's part of the French Renaissance.
And part of that, and he must have asked for that, because it comes out of the blue.
Instead of having the labours of the month, what you have are these illustrations of the antique origins of the name of each month.
So here we have...
the goddess Juno and her daughter, and these various characters, any of whose names might have given the name to the month of June.
So this is a very interesting text-picture relationship that is really unique.
I don't know of another example of a book of ours that has the antique origins illustrated for the names of the month.
And it's not only an interesting text-picture relationship-wise, but also the fact that it's an object of the Renaissance, the French Renaissance, you know, where there is an interest in antiquity.
And you can only get an example like this in the late 15th, early 16th century, at the milieu of this court, Charles VIII and Louis XII, who were importing Italian artists, you know, constantly running down Italy to conquer it.
bringing back books, bringing back libraries, and the court of Cardinal George D'Amboise.
They were very interested in Italian culture at this time, and this is the result of that intense interest in things.
So books of hours were pretty much
produced according to the specific requests of the individual?
They could be.
You could modify them pictorially and textually and ask for things like this because it was for your own private use.
See, books of ours weren't controlled by the church.
It wasn't like a missal or a choir book where the official church sanction had to be there.
They were a little bit beyond the control and therefore individual patrons could ask for
specific kinds of text and pictures to be put in them, and they could be modified and be very unique.
Wonderful.
The last favorite object I'll talk about.
I just have to meet my editor.
This is the column that I think the public will be very interested in.
And this is number six.
Number six.
This is on the wall.
This is framed on the wall.
Four leaves.
There are only four of them that survived.
They came up at auction in 1986.
They had been in a private collection.
Until then, they had been known only through old photographs, but no one had seen them in 50, 60 years, at least two generations.
And they came up with a private collection that sailed at Sotheby's.
It cost a great big stir, a lot of interest, for a number of reasons.
One is that they are the earliest illustrated life of Thomas Beckett.
date here from the middle of the 13th century wow so you're talking about uh less than 50 years after the death of the archbishop so i mean this is you know stupendous and they're english and um this is vellum yes and they're also quite beautiful and quite poignant i love this scene of in the dispute between thomas beckett and henry ii
The pope, Alexander, got involved because he wanted to keep the peace.
And so he tried to reconcile the two.
It didn't quite work.
And this is the leave-taking.
There they are in horseback.
You know, embracing each other, giving each other a farewell sort of kiss of peace as they're about to ride off.
This is one of the most touching scenes.
These beautiful poignant scenes hardly exist in the 13th century.
You said this caused a big stir?
Oh, yes.
Well, because they are the earliest illustrated life of Thomas Beckett.
a big deal because they were english that makes them closer to home because they were done within you know uh 50 years of but the stir being that that they shouldn't go into private ownership no no the stir being that there are a lot of people who wanted to acquire the personal collectors and uh private institutions i was working at the walters art gallery then and uh we got word that we were very interested and i know we weren't the only one was it a private transaction or was it kind of auction no they went at auction
Self-abuse?
I'll check it out.
The provenance will be in the catalog.
So these wonderful episodes... Self-abuse in England or here?
Self-abuse in England.
These wonderful episodes that people... I mean, if anybody from the Middle Ages...
that the common person off the street might know about, they will have heard of Thomas Beckett.
And it's, of course, the conflict, church-state conflicts that were behind this tragedy, these two men, are still conflicts that exist today in America and other countries.
separation of church and state.
In other words, there are still echoes today of the basic components of the conflict between these two, the relationship between church and state.
And these were part of a book?
These were part of a book.
Do you know for whom it was produced?
No, no.
And these are just the only ones that survived?
These are the only ones.
They were probably used in a bookbinding as padding, which is why they survived.
Amazing, huh?
So there are four of these.
Did they just come to light in 86?
They had been known.
As I said, old photographs had existed, but people didn't know where they were.
No one had seen them for years.
You think they were bindings?
They've been probably used as part of a binary, yes, which is why they had survived.
What's on the other side?
There are four pictures here on view, and there are four other pictures of different episodes.
On the other side?
On the other side, yes.
There are a total of eight pictures.
So at some place in the world, perhaps, there are books that might have these?
There could be, yes, as possible.
Interesting, and that's the Ptolemy, of course, right?
I was present when that was purchased.
I was purchased in 1990, when I was writing Channel 2.